---
title: sheafification
date: 2016-04-02
---

# Sheafification

*A Manifold is a space on which one can do calculus.* This is the phrase we wanted to 
explain in the post [what is a manifold?](2016-01-31-whatisamanifold.html) We finally 
got there in the [last post](2016-03-27-thejacobianmatrix.html) by defining the derivative of a 
smooth map between manifolds. We have only scratched the surface of differential 
geometry. There will be many future posts which dig deeper, but now we are going to 
pause and explore some of the more subtle aspects of sheaf theory. Upto this point, 
sheaves have provided a useful syntactic tool. Below, we shall explain why sheaf 
theory is a corner stone of modern geometry. If you really want to understand how 
sheaves work, you cannot escape [category theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category_theory). Consequently, this post will 
be more categorial than previous posts (sorry!).

### sheafification?

Let $X$ be a manifold. In [a previous post](2016-02-07-tangentspaces.html), we defined 
presheaves and sheaves over $X$. We define ${\bf PSh}(X)$ to be the category of 
presheaves over $X$ and ${\bf Sh}(X)$ to be the category of sheaves over $X$. There is 
a [fully faithful](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Full_and_faithful_functors) forgetful 
functor $F : {\bf Sh}(X) \to {\bf PSh}(X)$. It exists because every sheaf is a 
presheaf and sheaf morphisms are just presheaf morphisms. It is very common for 
forgetful functors to 
have [left adjoint functors](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adjoint_functors). The left 
adjoint functor to $F$ is called **sheafification** and denoted by $S : {\bf PSh}(X) 
\to {\bf Sh}(X)$. We shall construct $S$ and then prove that it satisfies the correct 
universal properties.

If $\mathcal{F}$ is a presheaf, then $S(\mathcal{F})$ can be thought of as the sheaf 
generated by $\mathcal{F}$. To understand this, recall that a sheaf is a presheaf such 
that
$$\mathcal{F}(V) \to \left\{ (s_i) \in \prod_i \mathcal{F}(U_i) : s_i \lvert_{U_i \cap U_j} = s_j \lvert_{U_i \cap U_j} \right\} \qquad s \mapsto (s \lvert_{U_i})$$
is bijective for every open cover $V = \cup_i U_i$. Now that we know about stalks, we 
can write down a related map. If $(s_p) \in \prod_{p \in V} \mathcal{F}_p$, we call 
$(s_p)$ a **consistent family** if for all $q \in V$, there is an open neighbourhood 
$q \in 
U \subseteq V$ and a section $f \in \mathcal{F}(U)$ such that $s_p = f_p$ for all $p \in 
U$. Define
$$ \iota_V : \mathcal{F}(V) \to \left\{ (s_p) \in \prod_{p \in V} \mathcal{F}_p : 
\text{$(s_p)$ is a consistent family} \right\} \qquad f \mapsto (f_p)$$
If you unravel the definitions, you can check that $\mathcal{F}$ is a sheaf 
if and 
only if $\iota_V$ is a bijection for each $V$. Moreover, even when $\mathcal{F}$ is 
not a sheaf, the codomains of the $\iota_V$ assemble to form a presheaf which is 
infact a sheaf! In light of this, we define
$$S(\mathcal{F})(V) = \left\{ (s_p) \in \prod_{p \in V} \mathcal{F}_p : 
\text{$(s_p)$ is a consistent family} \right\}$$ 
$S(\mathcal{F})$ is the sheafification of $\mathcal{F}$. The map $\mathcal{F} \mapsto 
S(\mathcal{F})$ is a functor. We have a natural transformation $\iota : 
\mathcal{F} \to S(\mathcal{F})$ which is an isomorphism if and only if $\mathcal{F}$ 
is a sheaf. Inorder to avoid boring coherence conditions, we shall collapse $\iota$ to 
the identity when $\mathcal{F}$ is a sheaf. This is 
[decategorification](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Categorification) and destroys any 
delicate homotopical structure we may want to preserve in the above arguments, but 
life is short and this is a blog. We have a bijection 
$${\rm Mor}_{{\rm PSh}(X)}(\mathcal{F},\mathcal{G}) = {\rm Mor}_{{\rm 
Sh}(X)}(S(\mathcal{F}),\mathcal{G})$$
defined by $\alpha \mapsto S(\alpha)$. The inverse map is defined by $g \mapsto g 
\circ \iota$. When you are checking that these maps are inverse, remember that we have 
collapsed $\iota : \mathcal{G} \to S(\mathcal{G})$ to the identity map when 
$\mathcal{G}%$ is a sheaf. This has some suprising consequences, for example it 
implies that $S(g) = g$.
